Abstract
Abstract. This article attempts to establish a sociology of the occult in general, and a sociology of the Western tarot in particular. The tarot is a deck of 78 cards invented in Italy in the fifteenth century. From humble beginnings as a device for gaming or gambling, the tarot became invested with occult, mystical, divine, spiritual, and even psychological significance. This investing became part of a larger strategy of discipline and indoctrination to ease the transition from preindustrial structures of power and authority to industrial and bureaucratic structures. That tarot, associated as it was with the emergence of elite Freemasonry, helped provide new ideologies of power and ways of existing within new tightly structured, bureaucratic organizations.

Journal Information
The specific objective of The Canadian Journal of Sociology/Cahiers canadiens de sociologie (CJS) is the dissemination of original and significant research and theory produced largely, but not exclusively, by Canadian researchers in Sociology and related disciplines. Our policy is to represent the diversity of theoretical and methodological orientations within Sociology. We also encourage an interdisciplinary focus, with articles and commentaries from demographers, historians, political scientists, economists, communications specialists, and criminologists. The strength of the CJS, above all, has been its unwavering commitment to being a research journal which advances knowledge in Sociology, to excellence, to scholarly diversity, to intellectual exchange and internationality. CJS is a distinctive combination of scientific and theoretical state-of-the-art articles, debate about current research issues, social commentary, reflections on the discipline, plus informative and scholarly book reviews. This combination is not offered by any other North American social science journal, and is unique in Canada.

Publisher Information
The Canadian Journal of Sociology publishes rigorously peer-reviewed research articles and innovative theoretical essays by social scientists from around the world, providing insight into the issues facing Canadian society as well as social and cultural systems in other countries. The journal also features a lively debate/commentary section encouraging the intensive exchange of ideas, along with regular sections such as “Notes on Society” that address topical issues of the day from a social science point of view and “Notes on the Discipline” designed to discuss a variety of issues encountered in the course of the sociological analysis of modern society. Each issue of the journal also has a comprehensive book review section.