A Sociology of TAroT
 Mike SoSTeric
 Abstract. This article attempts to establish a sociology of the occult in general, 
and a sociology of the Western tarot in particular. The tarot is a deck of 78 cards 
invented in Italy in the fifteenth century. From humble beginnings as a device 
for gaming or gambling, the tarot became invested with occult, mystical, divine, 
spiritual, and even psychological significance. This investing became part of a 
larger strategy of discipline and indoctrination to ease the transition from pre
industrial structures of power and authority to industrial and bureaucratic struc
tures. That tarot, associated as it was with the emergence of elite Freemasonry, 
helped provide new ideologies of power and ways of existing within new tightly 
structured, bureaucratic organizations. 
Keywords: Tarot, freemasonry, discipline and control, ideology, occult, religion, 
halo/sharp.
 Résumé. Cet article vise à établir une sociologie des sciences occultes en général 
et une sociologie du tarot en particulier. Le tarot comprend 78 cartes et a été 
inventé en Italie au XVe siècle. De ses débuts modestes en tant que jeu, le tarot 
s’est vu associé aux sciences occultes, mystiques, divines et spirituelles, prenant 
même une signification psychologique. Cette dimension s’est inscrite dans une 
plus grande stratégie de discipline et d’endoctrinement dans le but de faciliter la 
transition des structures préindustrielles du pouvoir et de l’autorité à des struc
tures industrielles et bureaucratiques. Ce tarot, associé à l’émergence de la franc
maçonnerie d’élite, a contribué aux nouvelles idéologies du pouvoir et des moy
ens d’exister dans les confins d’organisations très structurées et bureaucratiques.
 Mots-clés: Tarot, franc-maçonnerie, discipline et contrôle, idéologie, occulte, 
religion.
 © Canadian Journal of SoCiology/CahierS CanadienS de SoCiologie 39(3) 2014 357
358 © Canadian Journal of SoCiology/CahierS CanadienS de SoCiologie 39(3) 2014
 introduCtion
 Academics have long displayed an interest in psychical research, para
psychology, occult practices, and other phenomenon at the bound
aries of science (Collins & Pinch 1982; Truzzi 1974a, 1974b; Zaretsky 
& Leone 1974; Robbins & Anthony 1979). This multidisciplinary inter
est is traceable even to the founders of specific disciplines, although we 
might be surprised to find that thinkers like Freud (Devereux 1953), San
dor Ferenczi (Gyimesi 2012), William James (Sech, de Freitas Araujo 
& Moreira-Almedia, 2013) and other disciplinary luminaries took ser
iously the investigation of ‘boundary phenomenon.’ Sociologists have 
also expressed some interest in boundary phenomenon, the occult, se
cret societies, and such, but it has been far from all consuming. Simmel 
(2006) attempted to establish a sociology of secret societies and Tiryak
ian (1972) attempts to move us ‘toward a sociology of esoteric culture.’ 
Some work has been done in the Sociology of Science (Collins & Pinch 
1982), and Hess (2007) has examined spiritism in some detail, but by 
and large sociologists have been silent, both empirically and theoretic
ally, on issues of the occult. 
This lack of sociological interest and almost dismissive orientation 
can perhaps be traced to the dominant assumption that secularization and 
scientific rationality would eventually kill such practices outright (Lund
skow 2008). It could also be partly due to their disenchantment with 
natural forces (Stone 2006), partly to the Durkhemian view of religion 
as a basic expression of the underlying social order (Durkheim 1915), 
partly to an anti-occult narrative that dismisses such interest as ‘heresy’ 
or ‘superstition’ (Hanegraaff 2005; Versluis 2007), and partly to Marx
ian skepticism of religion and spirituality. As a result, sociology has paid 
little research attention to boundary subjects like, for example, the tarot. 
The tarot is a deck of cards used for occult and mystical practice with 
a history of socio-political intrigue dating back to the fifteenth century 
(Dummett 1980), but which hardly registers on the sociological radar at 
all. There is some interest in a scholarly study of tarot outside of sociol
ogy, but even there the ‘paucity of material’ requires a multidisciplinary 
approach (Farley 2009, 5) Farley (2009, 1) attributes the lack of interest 
in the tarot to its association with “shoddy soothsayers and confidence 
tricksters,” and that is certainly part of it. Whatever the reason, the lack 
of sociological interest in the tarot represents a significant theoretical and 
empirical lacuna because, as this paper will attempt to demonstrate, there 
are reasons to believe that the tarot has far more sociological significance 
than first attributed to it. In this paper we see that the Western tarot be
came a weapon used in an esoteric (i.e., secret) class war by ruling elites 
a SoCiology of tarot                                  
 359
 to regain the power they lost as Church authority, and elite authority in 
general, were dismantled during the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries 
as a result of the English, French, and scientific revolutions. 
What iS tarot?
 The characteristics of a tarot deck are peculiar. A tarot deck is a set of 
cards in two parts (Dummett 1980) — a set of fifty-six minor cards, 
minor arcana, or suit cards, and a set of 22 additional ‘major’ cards. In 
the ‘minor’ part of the deck there are four suits (Swords, Batons, Cups, 
and Coins), each of which contains the cards ace through ten as well 
as a King, Queen, Knight, and Jack. The major cards contain a Fool 
card, traditionally labeled 0, and twenty-one other major arcana or trump 
cards, numbered from I to XXI. Historically, the trump cards were: 
I
 Mountebank 
VIII Justice  XV The Devil 
II The Popess IX The Hermit XVI The Tower 
III The Empress X The Wheel 
of Fortune 
XVII The Star 
IV The 
Emperor 
XI Fortitude XVIII The Moon 
V The Pope XII The Hanged 
Man 
XIX The Sun 
VI Love XIII Death XX Judgement 
VII The Chariot XIV Temperance XXI The World 
According to Dummet (1980, 7), it is the presence of the twenty-two 
‘triumphs’ that always “distinguishes the tarot pack from every other 
360 © Canadian Journal of SoCiology/CahierS CanadienS de SoCiologie 39(3) 2014
 kind of playing-card pack.” In a tarot deck, the minor arcana may or may 
not be painted with images; however, the major arcana are almost always 
illustrated with fanciful, mythological, spiritual, and cultural imagery.
 divination
 When the Tarot first came into existence the deck was little more than 
a picture book, a system for gaming, possibly a device for gambling 
(Dummett 1980) and held no mystical, magical, or divinatory signifi
cance (Farley 2009). The tarot did, arguably, have allegorical signifi
cance and Farley (2009) provides a convincing argument that the tarot, 
originating within the cultural milieu of the Egyptian Mamlūk caste, was 
reinvented as an allegory for the life of the Viscontis, rulers of Milan, 
but beyond that there is no evidence (despite protestations of authors 
like Place (2005) who erroneously assert the tarot’s mystical credentials 
based on its association with the mystical secular art of the Renaissance), 
to suggest it was anything other than a simple game of cards. According 
to Farley (2009, 3), “It began its life as a game with no purpose beyond 
providing mental stimulation. It contained no esoteric wisdom, could 
provide no spiritual advice and gave no clue as to how to conduct one’s 
life.”  These days, however, the tarot has become much more. At its most 
sinister, the tarot is an indicator of, and perhaps gateway to, satanic wor
ship (Rudin 1990). 
Some traditional Christians, in particular those of an evangelical 
bent, have a powerful belief that the tarot is a book of the devil. This 
belief is so powerful that even to mention the word ‘tarot’ causes a vis
ceral, fear-based reaction (Anon 2012). However, the tarot is not primar
ily seen in this way. Much more common is a belief that the tarot was 
designed for, and can be used as, a tool for cartomancy. In the early days 
of tarot mysticism it was thought that the tarot could provide a gate
way or a channel that would facilitate communion with jinn, angels, and 
other exalted heavenly hosts. More recently, the superstition has been 
tempered, but the belief in gateways and channels remains, and in some 
surprising places. These days, the most respectable way to present the art 
of divination would be as an attempt to explain the world where science 
seems unable to work (Maitre & Becker 1966), as a tool for developing 
the ‘inner eye’ (Noddings & Shore 1984), or perhaps a way to tap into 
the knowledge contained in the unconscious (Bala 2008). The tarot also 
holds a respected place in Jungian psychology as a way to connect with 
“that level of nature that lies behind stars and cards and psyche and is 
expressed in all of them” (Spiegelman 1998, 93). For Spiegelman “that 
a SoCiology of tarot                                  
 361
 level of nature” is the level of ‘archetypes.’ According to Spiegelman 
‘archetypes’ represent grand cosmic templates and patterns all of which 
can, when suitably connected with, yield prescient and prophetic con
tent. 
However, as noted above, while the twenty-two trump cards that dis
tinguish a tarot deck from a ‘normal’ pack may have been developed 
with allegory in mind (Farley 2009; Pratesi 1989), there are no estab
lished references to the use of the tarot as a fortune-telling tool until the 
middle of the eighteenth century (Dummett 1980). The first association 
of the tarot with mystical or divinatory proclivities emerge specifically 
with the work of Antoine Court de Gébelin, M[onsieur] le C[omte] de M. 
and Etteilla (whose real name was Jean-Baptiste Alliette). Both can be 
traced to the publication, in 1781, of Court de Gébelin’s nine-volume Le 
Monde primitif, more precisely, to two seminal essays, one by Court de 
Gébelin, and the other by M. le C. de M. (Dummett 1980). Prior to this 
publication, the tarot was seen as nothing more than a vehicle for a game 
of cards, and an outlet for the vice of gambling. Afterward, however, 
the tarot gradually became a divinatory masterpiece and key to all life’s 
mysteries. Before we address the question of why the tarot changed, and 
what is significant about the dates, it will be worthwhile to highlight just 
what the tarot has become since Court de Gébelin first set the ball rolling
 a hermetiC myStery tool
 It is surprising enough that the tarot, a mere pack of cards with pretty 
pictures, would become a significant tool in the repository of the Jungian 
therapist, but even more surprising is the spiritual import that has been 
placed on this not-really-so-ancient pack of cards. For many, the tarot 
has become a hermetic or spiritual tool. ‘Hermetic,’ in this instance, is to 
be understood both as “a tool of occult science and magic,” and as “hav
ing a lineage traceable to Hermes Trismegistus.” Thrice-great Hermes 
was the mythological author of a corpus of works teaching Hermeti
cism, a belief that the world can be influenced through contact with and 
exploitation of ‘heavenly forces’ — magic in other words. In this view, 
the tarot is a book of ‘special’ symbols, a “perfectly simple philosophical 
machine” that contains “the whole science” and “that astonishes by the 
depth of its results” (Levi 2002, 85). According to this line of thought, 
the tarot is not an ‘open’ book; rather, it is a secret book, a hidden book, 
one open only to those who undergo a “special training of the mind” 
(Ouspensky 1976, 2). With the tarot, it becomes possible to mediate be
tween humanity and the Godhead, between god/spirit/consciousness and 
362 © Canadian Journal of SoCiology/CahierS CanadienS de SoCiologie 39(3) 2014
 profane human existence (Semetsky 2011a). In the Hermetic tradition, 
tarot is variously a teaching tool used to develop special skills, a “com
plete code of Hermetic symbolism” (Ouspensky 1976, 2), a “summary 
of Hermetic Sciences” (Ouspensky 1976, 6), and a way of revealing the 
“interface between human kind and the cosmos” (Jorgensen & Jorgensen 
1982, 381).
 Occult reality, then, is “idealistic” or spirit like in fundamental character. 
The material world (that world available to sensory experience) is held 
to be an illusion; matter, in other words, is dominated by spirit. The tarot 
symbolically represents material phenomena (heavenly bodies, political, 
family, economic relations) in terms of nonmaterial principles and forces 
thought to constitute the True nature of the universe. Though hidden and 
concealed, these supernatural forces are accessible to human beings by 
way of intuitive, mystical, or psychic insights. (Jorgensson & Jorgensen 
1982, 380)
 As Jayanti (2004, ix) notes, “... the images in the true1 tarot are liberating 
in their effect as they present the reality behind appearance which is the 
search of all aspirants... The tarot is the easiest gateway to the Great Mys
teries of Life.” In sum, in the magical mystery traditions of the Western 
world, the tarot is an esoteric tool of mysticism, a supreme instrument 
of divination, a deck of secret knowledge, an ancient Egyptian fountain 
of wisdom, a bible of bibles, a bible of humanity containing wisdom 
from the time the world was born, a book of Thoth, a book of Adam, a 
revelation of ancient civilizations, and the whole cosmic/cosmological/
 theological and philosophical ball of wax rolled up into one convenient 
package of cheaply illustrated paper cards (see Dummett 1980; 2007).
 1. Not the “fake” Tarot, but the “true” tarot. Ever since the Freemasons took 
over tarot imagery there have been attempts to “manifest” the “true” tarot. 
Commentators like Crowley and Waite, and all those before, approach the 
tarot as if it is a puzzle in need of solution, or a cosmic gestalt in need of 
expression. For all these people there is an underlying truth that needs reveal
ing. Thus each approach is an attempt to uncover the true meanings of the 
cards. Truth can be located in mystical gnosis (as the Freemasons attempt to 
do) or archetypal revelation (as Jungian therapists to do), but either way there 
is an attempt to find the “true” tarot. Of course, the argument of this paper is 
essentially there is no “true” tarot. There may be spiritual and gnostic truths to 
discover in this world, but these truths are not inherent in the tarot. The tarot 
is a human construction and thus the question is not whether we can discover 
the “true” tarot, but are we satisfied with the thing that we have constructed. 
Personally I am not satisfied with the masonic Tarot and have been working 
to see something new, something more progressive, constructed in its place 
(see comments in the conclusion of this paper).
a SoCiology of tarot                                  
 363
 magiCal SemiotiC revelation/therapy
 We will return to analysis of ‘hermetic mysteries’ of tarot shortly. It is 
worth noting that out of the view that tarot is some magical, spiritual tool 
have arisen other schools of thought. Noteworthy is the Jungian school 
of psychology where you will find the same hyperbolic discourse on the 
powerful tarot. Here the tarot is a tool for praxis therapy, a thing to facili
tate the process of ‘individuation’ (Gad 1994), an instrument capable of 
“heal[ing the] human psyche and lift[ing the] human spirit” (Semetsky  
2010b, 59), and offering transformation and transcendence (Bala 2010). 
Its efficacy is established by linking it to psychological theories of ‘ab
jection’ and archetypal psychology (Semetsky 2000). We can use indi
vidual archetypes to facilitate self-journey and awareness, reading deep 
archetypal significance from them (Nichols 1974). In certain branches 
of psychology, the tarot is even more than mere individuation. Its utility 
is extended into the world of semiotics and child psychology (Jayanti 
2004). Some see tarot as a tool to teach children the “three I’s” of “in
formal education”: intuition, insight, imagination (Semetsky 2011a), or 
even as a powerful therapeutic tool, a reflection of the four gateways of 
childhood, bursting with deep psychological meaning, a divine reflec
tions of deep psychology so powerful that it might help heal the inner 
child and rework toxic socialization. As Jayanti (2004, 8) notes:
 To conclude, [because] so many of us were brought up in dysfunctional 
families...a great need to re-habituate or re-parent...ourselves has arisen. 
Many types of work geared to reclaim and heal the Inner Child have be
come available to answer this need. The ancient Qabalistic tarot and Tree 
of Life have offered the tools with which to do this type of transforma
tional work.
 According to Semetsky (2011a, 252) “The tarot images that are laid 
down in a particular pattern are thereby ‘selected’ by soul, by the uncon
scious, and cannot be considered random.” In this way, the tarot becomes 
a kind of mystical Rorschach, allowing an individual or therapist access 
to deep levels of meaning in the collective memory pool for the purpos
es of spiritual work, meaning, and mythological revelation (Semetsky 
2009; 2011b). “When symbolically represented in Tarot images, the tran
scendental realm of the psyche is being brought, so to speak, down to 
earth by virtue of its embodiment in physical reality.” (Semetsky 2010a, 
110, emphasis in the original). In line with this line of thinking Nichol
son (2003) uses the tarot to illustrate deep wisdom of feminist theology, 
and Santarcangeli (1979, 33) informs us of the deep cosmic ‘wisdom’ 
of the fool. If you believe the psychologists, pregnant with meaning, the 
364 © Canadian Journal of SoCiology/CahierS CanadienS de SoCiologie 39(3) 2014
 tarot is a teacher of lessons and a font of cosmic/genetic/racial wisdom 
and memory. 
the reality
 At this point the question is begged, what is it about the tarot that has 
made it into such a special tool for so many people. More to the point, 
why did a simple game of cards become the magical mystery tour de 
force that it is today? The first clue to unraveling ‘the mysteries of tarot’ 
comes in the origin and time line of the tarot deck. The tarot’s origins 
can be precisely pinned down, specifically to the royal courts of fifteenth 
century Italy (Dummett 1980). After that date, there are no references 
to the tarot as anything other than a game (or a vice) until just before 
the French Revolution (1789 - 1799), when Protestant priest and Free
mason Antoine Court de Gébelin published (in 1781) volume eight of Le 
Monde primitif (Decker, Depaulis & Dummett 1996). In that volume are 
two essays, one by de Gébelin, and the other by M. le C. de M.2 expound
ing on the mystical, cabbalistic, astrological, and Egyptian significance 
of the fifteenth century Italian tarot (Dummett 1980).  
Subsequent to the publication of these essays, the tarot was picked up 
by famous cartomancers, including Etteilla and Mlle. Marie-Anne Adel
aide Lenormand, and later still, commented on by magical (and Her
metic, Rosicrucian, and Masonic) luminaries such as Eliphas Levi, Ar
thur Edward Waite, Aleister Crowley, and so on (Dummett 1980; Decker 
and Dummett 2002; Farley 2009). During the period of effusive impos
ition of occult significance, the tarot came to be associated with ancient 
Egyptian high priests, ancient cabbalistic Jews, Hermes Trismegistus, 
the divine Lux (light/spirit) behind reality, the Gypsies (who were said 
to be roaming Egyptians), the divine name of God (the Tetragramma
ton), and the Sephiroth (divine emanations). It was, so they said, created 
under the direction of Hermes, devised by seventeen magi, and written 
on magical leaves of gold (Dummett 1980, 107). Originally constructed 
as a game, or a book of allegories, the tarot was co-opted by esoteric/
 secret societies, became associated with their ‘secret knowledge,’ and 
eventually came to inscribe not only their magical ‘initiation rituals,’ but 
the magical path of the soul as well.
 The question at this point must be, does the tarot contain esoteric 
truths from ancient Egypt? Is it a magical book of books? Did Egyptian 
2. Court De Gébelin refers to the author of the second essay as M. le C. de 
M.***. As Dummett (1980: 105) notes, Robin Briggs identifies the contribu
tor as Louis-Raphael-Lucréce de Fayolle, Comte de Mellet. de Fayolle was a 
brigadier in the cavalry, a governor, and an “unremarkable court noble.”
a SoCiology of tarot                                  
 365
 high priests and ancient high gods write the divine wisdom of the cos
mos onto the gold leaves of tarot? The answer to that is an unequivocal,  
no. According to three of the most authoritative figures on the subject, 
there is no historical basis to any of the ancient (or modern) occultists’ 
claims about the significance of the tarot (Decker & Dummett 2002; 
Farley 2009). In fact, according to Dummett (1980), historical claims 
that the tarot is anything other than an Italian game of trumps are an 
uninformed, esoteric mish-mash. The question isn’t how to uncover the 
secret mystical knowledge, but rather “Why did a simple pack of cards 
come to take on such magical and mysterious import?” This sociological 
question remains largely unanswered (Decker & Dummett 2002, 315). 
unraveling the myStery
 The first clues to unraveling the ‘mystery’ come from the temporal loca
tion of its emergence as a divinatory tool, specifically, during the French 
Revolution. At that time, traditional power structures were crumbling 
and New World industrial capitalism was emerging. The popular mind 
sees this period as one of general emancipation, but as any sociologist 
will know, the history of the French, English and Dutch revolutions and 
the emergence of industrial capitalism is not the history of the end of 
class oppression. Instead, it is the history of the replacement (more or 
less) of one ruling class with another. During the transition, feudal re
lations of power, feudal ideological institutions, and feudal systems of 
control were replaced with industrial ones.
 The story of this transformation is understood, at least in general 
terms, as a disciplinary revolution. Between the eighteenth century and 
middle of the nineteenth, Western institutions changed dramatically 
(Kieser 1998) and new forms of behavior were required if industrial 
capitalism was to survive and thrive (Weber 2003). It essentially came 
down to the creation of new kinds of authority, and new power relations, 
as economic, productive, and social crises brought the old feudal order 
to its knees (Dobb 1972). It is, in short, about the creation of modern 
corporate/ bureaucratic control structures, fitting workers and middle 
management with the executive branches, and creating the well-oiled 
capitalist machine we have today (Barnard 1968). In the context of the 
disintegration of traditional organizations and traditional authority struc
tures, the issue was one of authority, command, control, and legitimacy 
(Weber 2003), especially in emerging industrial production. Modern 
corporations and bureaucracies have top-down executive control and 
established disciplinary procedures, but these things would have been 
366 © Canadian Journal of SoCiology/CahierS CanadienS de SoCiologie 39(3) 2014
 absent at the cusp of the revolution. At that time, there would have been 
an obvious need to create new organizational structures and civilizing 
influences (Elias 1994), and of course, that is what happened. It is a com
mon story in sociology with the rise of the Protestant ethic (Weber 1987; 
2003) and the dispersion of ‘institutional strategies’ for maintaining col
lective discipline throughout Europe (Gorski 1993, 266). 
In the context of ‘institutional strategies’ for maintaining collective 
discipline, Freemasonry and other middle-class “men’s huts” (Jewkes, 
2005, 47)3 can been analyzed sociologically. According to Jewkes 
(2005), freemasonry is part of a male bonding ritual, characterized by 
hierarchies and exclusions, and that reproduces and reaffirms patriarchy, 
unequal power relations, and ‘male’ hegemony. Jewkes’ comments are 
relevant here, not so much for the Masonic performance of patriarchy, 
but for the way the Masonic universe reinforces and, more importantly, 
re-creates power relations, not in a feudal way, but in a bourgeois one. 
When they were first introduced, Masonic lodges were safe places 
to explore, proselytize, and convert people to the new social order. “It 
was in the lodges and through them that the bourgeoisie acquired a so
cial form of its own. In imitating both its mystery won a place beside 
the ecclesiastical mysteries and the arcane politics of States” (Koselleck 
1988, 72,  quoted in Horn 2011, 111). According to Kieser (1998, 47), 
Freemasonry was part of the shift in control and disciplinary strategies 
from feudal organizations, such as guilds, which “encompassed” mem
bers “in total”) and organizations that required less complete forms of 
immersion (i.e. pre-modern bureaucracies). In this context, Freemasonry 
was an ideological and pedagogical control strategy, helping to facilitate 
not only required changes in behaviour, but also the development and 
acceptance of modern command and control structures. As Kieser notes:
 The shift from estates to organizations necessitated enormous changes in 
the individual’s behaviour. Today, organizational behaviour has become 
so common that we are no longer aware of the amount of learning about 
new behaviour that members of the early organizations had to manage. 
3. Men’s huts are “where those men who have earned the right to call them
selves men, or are in the process of attaining this emblem of privilege, gather” 
(Remy 1990, 45, cited in Jewkes 2005, 47). Jewkes goes on to say “[m]en’s 
huts for the middle class are institutions such as golf clubs, gentlemen’s clubs, 
and Freemason lodges, while working class manifestations include pubs and 
betting shops” (2005, 47). Men’s huts exclude women and “uninitiated” men. 
The metaphor derives from the physical men’s huts found in many hunter
gatherer societies. Anthropologists have found that the greater the distance 
(physical or social) between the men’s hut and the rest of the village, the 
poorer the relative position of women within the society (see, for example, 
Spain, 1992).
a SoCiology of tarot                                  
 367
 For example, in organizations, they had to accept a person as a superior 
for the simple reason that this person was appointed as a superior. The su
perior could be younger, less educated, of a lower social status, less skilled 
— none of this mattered; as a subordinate, one had to accept his or her 
orders. On the upper levels of an organization, the member also had to be 
able to make decisions according to the rules sine ira et studio (without ire 
and passion), even if, as an individual, he or she would have decided dif
ferently. In general, as a member of an organization, one has to do things 
for an organization according to plans, procedures, or orders that, as an 
individual, one would tend to reject. In the 18th century, very few people 
were able to exhibit a behaviour that was appropriate for organizations 
and even fewer were capable of designing organizations. (1998, 47)
 In the context of the disciplinary revolution, Gorski (1993) notes two 
important features of the new organizations: an ethic of social discipline 
and surveillance. Members of modern organizations enter into a disci
plinary community with all the standard features of modern control, in
cluding enclosure, partitioning, ranking, organizational rules, etc. (see, 
for example, Foucault 1975). Furthermore, the ethic of social discipline 
requires mutual (later technological) surveillance. Freemasonry was 
very popular in the late seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries, a 
time when feudal methods of control and discipline were dissipating and 
new forms were required. Freemasonry provided discourses of authority, 
a disciplinary ethic, and provisions for mutual surveillance and social 
discipline, all rooted in and inspired by Calvinism and ascetic Protest
ant ethics (Gorski 1993). Kieser (1998) provides a revealing translation 
of several masonic speeches of the era. Freemasons saw themselves as 
‘impressive men,’ conscious of their role in the formation of new social 
orders, and actively involved in steering its emergence. Freemasons had 
a moral duty for mutual education in temperance, politeness, prudence, 
perseverance, and other characteristics suitable to a new and emerging 
bourgeois society. Freemasons were admonished to be active, to have a 
strong work ethic, and to engage themselves in useful labour, all very 
valuable advice for anyone seeking entrance into the power centres of 
the emerging middle classes. 
Lodges were thus organizations that enabled their members to de
velop precisely those skills they would need as capitalism developed. 
Lodges constructed the first hierarchies4 divorced from feudal tradition, 
4.  Masonry has a “trigradal” system, entered apprentice, fellow craftsmen, and 
master (Knoop & Jones, 1947). This three tiered division, which emerged as 
Freemasonry passed from operative into speculative forms, reflect the Cap
italist social classes, lower, middle, and upper, and also the worker, middle 
management, and executive branches of modern organizational bureaucra
cies
368 © Canadian Journal of SoCiology/CahierS CanadienS de SoCiologie 39(3) 2014
 basing advancement not on ‘the dignity of birth,’ but on the acquisition 
of key organizational and moral skills, such as self-discipline, reliability, 
loyalty, and subservience to the command chain, and this was true even for 
nobles (Manheim 1979, cited in Kieser 1988).  Nobles entered lodges as 
well, and they did so as a way to transition themselves from old power re
lationships into new ones. Lodges offered a way for old layers of nobility 
to mingle with emerging industrial elites (Kieser 1988). Similarly, Free
masonry offered the upper bourgeoisie fulfillment of its need for prestige 
and recognition. In this way, secret societies, as they initially emerged, 
helped to bridge the social gap (Kieser 1988). Perhaps most importantly, 
Freemasonry facilitated the development of a morality that would facili
tate business relationships (Schindler 1982, cited in Kieser 1988). In this 
regard, Freemasonry can be considered a brilliant and self-conscious strat
egy for lubricating the transition from and old to a new world order — it 
helped create new modes of discipline and authority, and new power struc
tures, all the while co-opting potential resistance (by incorporating feudal 
authority) and obscuring the intent and outcome of its operations.
 The ideological, political, and social functions of the Freemasons 
(and other secret groups) have long been established.5 The question now 
becomes, “What does all this have to do with the tarot?” The answer is, 
“Everything.”  From almost the beginning, the tarot has been an essential 
part of ideological indoctrination in secret brotherhoods, and a tool useful 
for facilitating the mutual education of the emerging social elites. Indeed, 
new speculative lodges were barely open a day before tarot became in
corporated. The moment of creation of the ‘occult tarot,’ and the principle 
author responsible, are highly revealing indicators. As Dummett notes:
 The entire occultist tarot tradition stems from the work of Antoine Court 
de Gébelin (1719 - 1784), a Protestant pastor, Freemason, and savant. 
5.  Interestingly, the story of the Masonic men’s hut as tool of ideological in
doctrination of the emerging elites fits well with the historical transformation 
that occurred in Freemasonry during the 18th century. Prior to about 1740 
Freemasonry was nothing more nor less than a craft union, functioning to 
organize stone workers, protect their interests, and protect the craft (Knoop 
& Jones, 1947).In the 16th and 17th centuries however Freemasonry was 
transformed from “operational” to “accepted,”  and finally to a “speculative” 
secret society. This transformation occurred as the doors of the organization 
where thrown open to individuals outside of the craft itself. It began when 
Freemasonry began to “accept” members as brothers despite the fact that they 
were not stone masons. Initially acceptance was based on an expressed inter
ests in architecture or engineering (both loosely related to craft working) but 
later, as elite, nobles, merchants, and others were “accepted,” the pretense 
was dropped altogether.  At a certain point, 1740 to be specific (Knoop & 
Jones, 1947), speculative Freemasonry, a Freemasonry based on the creation 
of legend, mystery, and “esoteric” secrets, was born..  
a SoCiology of tarot                                  
 369
 Born in Geneva, he was the son of Antoine Court, the most prominent 
French Protestant pastor of his day, and lived in Switzerland until he was 
40. (1980, 102, emphasis added) 
Court de Gébelin initiated the idea of the occult tarot. Following him, the 
idea of ‘the tarot as occult masterpiece’ was extended by Freemasons, 
clerics, and other members of the emerging elite (Dummett 1980). The 
ideological imposition reached a sort of culmination with the work of 
prominent Freemason, A.E.Waite in the early twentieth century, but even 
down to this day tarot decks are regularly linked to secret societies.6 For 
example, authors such as Jayanti (2004, v) reference well-known Free
masons like Paul Foster Case as teachers. And lest one doubt the inser
tion of tarot into ideologies of hierarchy and control, Jayanti unselfcon
sciously discusses major modern decks as derived from elite organiza
tions participating in the ‘spiritual hierarchies’ (read ‘elite hierarchies’) 
of this world:
 The true tarot decks that have been published by authentic Mystery 
Schools, such as the Order of the Golden Dawn of England with the Rider 
deck, and the Builders of the Adytum of the US with the Case deck, are 
true in that they most closely approximate the unpublished tarot of the In
ner School, the Spiritual Hierarchy of the world (Jayanti, 2004: ix).
 Of these ‘inner schools,’ Lachman’s (2011) remarkably forthright, if not 
particularly introspective, comments are instructive as well: 
The Secret Chiefs, the Hidden Masters, the Inner Circle, the Illuminati, 
the King of the World: we know them all today, perhaps in different forms 
and perhaps by different names. But we know them. They are the ones in 
control. They are the ones behind the closed doors and within the locked 
rooms. They are the ones with the secret knowledge, who speak a secret 
language. They know the magic symbols that unlock the gates that lead to 
worlds beyond our own. They have passed through the trials and ordeals 
of initiation. They have found the Holy Grail, the Philosopher’s Stone, 
the Emerald Tablet, the dreaded Necronomicon and the lost continent of 
Atlantis.
 The question now becomes, why choose tarot for this purpose and 
why incorporate it as a tool of indoctrination when it was merely a card 
game at the time? The answer, although lost in the mists of time, likely 
revolves around (a) the allegorical meaning of the images, a meaning 
linked to the Italian courts of the fifteenth century, (b) their suitability 
6. For a more detailed overview of the history of the occult tarot, see http://
 en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Divinatory tarot (retrieved April 2, 2013).
370 © Canadian Journal of SoCiology/CahierS CanadienS de SoCiologie 39(3) 2014
 as an imaginative device capable of absorbing additional meaning, and 
(c) their suitability for ideologically impregnated drama. As Dummett 
(1980) notes, the original tarot decks were painted for members of the 
royal elite. As Farley (2009) discovered, the images themselves were 
representative of the life and times of important noble families. Thus 
the images incorporated themes that any sociologist would recognize 
as representing elite life, elite priorities, elite ideology, and elite spiritu
ality.7 There is a Court Fool, for example, and a Court Juggler. The au
thority of the state and church are clearly represented in the Empress, 
Emperor, and Pope cards. There’s a Chariot carrying the king, a Hermit 
(a monk perhaps), an angel of Temperance, and the Justice of the royal 
courts. Death, a common fact of life, is represented, as is Love (and mar
riage). Even the Christian last Judgement, a cautionary tale if there ever 
was one, is there.
 Figure One: The Emperor and Hierophant (Pope) from the Rider-Waite 
Deck
 
The presence of elite ideology and practice in the already existing tarot 
deck would likely have been attractive to the Protestant clerics and Free
masons who co-opted the deck. After all, they were demonstrably mem
bers of the elite already. More attractive perhaps would have been the 
opportunity to read in additional meaning. Images are worth a thousand 
words we are told, but what words those might be are often a matter of 
7. See http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tarot_de_Marseille for a representation of 
the Tarot de Marsailles, one of the earliest, and certainly the most influential, 
representation. [Retrieved April 3, 2013]
a SoCiology of tarot                                  
 371
 imagination and interpretation. As recognized by some Jungian psych
ologists (see, for example, Rosengarten 2000), tarot images (like any 
good images) are artistic devices that can carry significant additional 
meaning. It took only a few years before the originators of the occult 
tarot had impressed dogma, magic, and mysticism from the Western 
esoteric traditions upon the tarot.8 Soon tarot cards conveyed cabbalis
tic, astrological, alchemical, and gnostic import (Decker and Dummett 
2002). The allegorical bed of the tarot provided a fertile ground within 
which to plant the seeds of a new, post-feudal ideology. 
Finally, tarot was probably attractive to emerging elites because of 
the initiatory function it could come to serve. Versluis (2007) notes that 
initiation is a crucial part of the entire Western esoteric tradition. Initia
tory rights can be traced to antiquity and are to be found, for example, in 
the early Eleusinian mysteries, where initiates were called epoptes (i.e., 
those who behold). Epoptes were served by the hierophant, the one who 
reveals the secret truths. Interestingly, Plato’s Allegory of the Cave can 
be read as a tale of initiation: 
“This famous Allegory of the Cave reveals themes that reappear through
out the subsequent history of Western esoteric traditions, above all, the 
conflict between the uninitiated and those who have eyes to see” Versluis 
(2007, 16) 
Initiation is a form of secret baptism, and is understood as a ‘revelatory’ 
process. The propaganda of initiation holds that, in an initiation experi
ence, the seekers’ eyes are opened, they are bathed in light, and ac
cess to the liminal realms of knowledge are opened to them. Initiatory 
rights are indoctrination ceremonies where elite ideology is impressed 
upon the epoptes using common ideological and emotive devices. In 
this regard, the tarot came to provide a sort of prototypical initiatory 
experience, where meaning and message could be conveyed under the 
cloak of ideologically pregnant image, ritual, and drama. These com
ments are not original. In fact, members of elite organizations under
stand perfectly the goal of drama in evoking emotions and controlling 
thought. As two magicians from the modern Order of the Golden Dawn 
admit, it is all about manipulating emotions to deliver “messages” to 
the initiates: 
Such dramas were intended to captivate the senses and tug at the emotions 
as they retold the sacred legends and delivered important teachings to de
vout followers. Then, just as now, ritualists employed theatrical props, 
8. As noted by Versluis (2007), these are Hermeticism, gnosticism, Jewish 
mysticism, and Christian gnosis. 
372 © Canadian Journal of SoCiology/CahierS CanadienS de SoCiologie 39(3) 2014
 special effects, symbolism, gestures, speeches, and other elements of per
formance to have the greatest visual and emotive impact on their audience 
and to convey the desired message or catharsis of feeling. (Cicero and 
Cicero 2012, 108)
 In a word, brainwashing. While neither the Freemasons nor the Rosi
crucians used tarot as initiatory vehicles at first, by the middle of the 
eighteenth century, the tarot became the vehicle for initiation into ‘the 
mysteries’ (Dummett 1980)9 
Of course, just because the tarot was attractive did not make it an 
automatic tool for ideological manipulation and control. Work had to 
be done on this game to establish its ‘occult authority’. Elite authors 
(many of them high-level Freemasons) throughout the eighteenth, nine
teenth and twentieth centuries established the authority of the tarot in 
a curiously anti-intellectual fashion, citing not the actual history of the 
deck (which could never have supported their claims to its occult au
thority) but instead pointing to a fabricated history of legend10 based on 
fanciful and metaphysical imagination. They also exploited incestuous 
citation practices (citing one another’s works as authorities), and also 
relied heavily on what Dummett (1980, 124) calls ‘false ascription.’ 
False ascription is a rhetorical strategy designed to bolster authority of a 
phenomenon by attributing it, or commentary on it, to some form of au
thoritative source. In the case of the tarot, the authoritative source could 
be an ancient philosopher, a mythological figure, an esoteric tradition, 
or whatever else could be conceived of. Over and over, we find auth
ors of tarot books and cards making outrageous claims about the deck, 
developing false lineages, attributing it to mythological forces, making 
9. The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross is a mystical society that originated in 
Germany in the early seventeenth century. Rosicrucianism has always been 
an esoteric philosophy, but it was also associated with Protestantism and 
concerned with empiricism rather than dogma. It is considered to have been 
an early influence in the development of the Royal Society, which was es
tablished in London in 1660, and devoted to the exploration of science and 
natural history. Freemasonry incorporates many Rosicrucian principles and 
rituals. For a discussion of the origins and influence of the Rosicrucians, see 
Yates (1975).
 10. The creators of the occult tarot were not the only ones creating false hist
ories and “legend.” As Knoop and Jones (19747) note, early speculative 
Freemasons in the period between 1712 and 1740 spent a lot of time con
structing the legends of Freemasonry. Interestingly there is, at least amongst 
Freemasons of the time, a recognition that the legends were legends and not 
to be taken as serious historical accounts (Knoop and Jones, 1947). This is a 
fact lost on many modern tarot aficionados who, even when presented with 
scholarly evidence to the contrary, continue to maintain the deck has an an
cient Egyptian, hermeneutic, or gnostic significance.
a SoCiology of tarot                                  
 373
 ridiculous epistemological and ontological claims, and generally going 
to great lengths to ignore history and establish the authority of the tarot.11 
It is the argument of this paper that it is precisely because the tarot was 
understood and developed as a device for ideological indoctrination that 
the history of the tarot was so blithely ignored and a new one built. One 
could not build a powerful tool for indoctrination on the fact that the 
tarot was a simple card game invented in the Italian courts — that would 
immediately raise doubts about authority, and concerns about ideologic
al content. Thus, lies where told, and authority built, by claiming great 
antiquity, Egyptian roots, mythological origins, gypsy diaspora, and so 
on (Farley 2009). In this way, the occult authority of the deck was bol
stered at the same time that its ideological content became ‘veiled.’ It is 
notable that the ‘veil’ was not something of divine origin, rather imposed 
by the conscious strategies of the Freemasons involved. 
the ideology
 For five centuries or more tarot cards have been used in Europe, ostensibly 
for games and fortune-telling, but really to preserve the essentials of a se
cret doctrine. They form a symbolic alphabet of the ancient wisdom, and 
to their influence upon the minds of a few enlightened thinkers we may 
trace the modern revival of interest in that wisdom. (Case 2012, 5)
 The question remains, “What exactly is the ideology embedded in the 
tarot?” We might think that uncovering this ideology would be a ma
jor challenge, especially since Western esoteric traditions are, by and 
large, secret traditions, but it is not that hard, for several reasons. For one 
thing, and as contradictory as it might seem, modern esoteric traditions 
are by and large written traditions (Versluis 2007). Ideology is imprinted 
in words and images, and it is often very easy, if one has the right per
spective (the “eyes to see” as they say), or can make a simple intellec
tual connection, to read the ideology directly from the image or text. 
Consider the Wheel of Fortune card, which is typically said to indicate 
the ‘kingdom’ or, more directly, the world around us. It is an image of 
11.  A representative sample of this charade is provided by Mathers (1888), a 
Freemason and one of the original members of the Hermetic Order of the 
Golden Dawn. One need only read two or three pages of the online text to 
see the absurdity. See http://www.sacred-texts.com/tarot/mathers/index.htm 
(retrieved April 3, 2013). See also Paul Foster Case (2012), who embraced 
the mythology with both arms, and extended it back into the ancient Vedas, 
holding it up as representative of universal truths buried deep in the heart of 
the tarot. 
374 © Canadian Journal of SoCiology/CahierS CanadienS de SoCiologie 39(3) 2014
 reality, often with karma invoked. It is the expression of spirit, a work
ing out of the true law of the universe, a perfect representation of divine 
providence, or as Paul Foster Case says, a representation of “spirit in 
self-expression”: 
The tenth trump, the Wheel of Fortune, is Malkuth, the Kingdom. As the 
parables of Jesus plainly show, that Kingdom is not a state of life after 
death; nor is it, except in a very limited sense, a social order. It is the 
method of Spirit in self-expression; and because cyclicity is characteristic 
of that method, the tarot symbolizes the Perfect Law as Buddha did, by a 
Wheel. (Case 2012, 32)
 It is quite interesting that Case drops the word ‘social order’ into his 
description of the meaning of this card. What a social order, however 
limited, has to do with the self-expression of Spirit is unclear, but it is 
apparently related. Case of course doesn’t bring out the nature of the 
social order in his text. This is a “secret” tradition after all where the 
inner truths of the hearts of men are drawn out in the hidden spaces of 
the temple alcove. The meaning of the card, and the nature of the “social 
order,” is available however in the visual imagery of the card with clar
Figure Two: The Golden Dawn World Card
 ity, precision, and dramatic oomph. Consider the Golden Dawn image 
below. 
Figure Two: The Golden Dawn World Card
 
 
The social order that Case is referring to is quite plain to see in the 
card above. Nature below, the gods above, and the wheel of life’s cycles 
of (birth and rebirth) in between. This is an elite social order and this 
a SoCiology of tarot                                  
 375
 elite social order is embedded in Western esoteric traditions all the way 
back to Plato, as Versluis notes of his Republic, “The Republic also res
onates with the recurrent idea of creating a spiritual utopia governed 
by an enlightened elite, a concept found much later, for example, in 
the Rosicrucian movement of the seventeenth century” (Versluis 2007, 
16). Looking at the card it is hard not to see the enlightened spiritual 
elite governing the unenlightened and primitive masses. The ideology 
or ‘message’ embedded in the card is something that should be familiar 
to any second year sociology student: the card represents a two-class 
social system, and a not very pretty one at that. The upper class is royal 
and regal, while the lower class is unevolved, ape-like, and clearly pas
sive. The Golden Dawn card is remarkable not only for the ‘hide in plain 
sight’ way that elite ideology is presented, but also for the remarkable 
way the ideology is accepted as part of a package of divine revelation, of 
spirit expressing itself in the Kingdom. Elites are justified to rule because 
they have access to the ‘light,’ they are ‘evolved,’ and so on. The rhet
orical turn (reinforced by a visual turn, crucial in pre-literate societies) 
represented here should be apparent, and a visceral reaction may even 
accompany our realization that the divine, magical, Egyptian, Vedic wis
dom represented in this card is nothing more than a prettied up version 
of Catholic doctrine concerning the divine right of kings. Social class, 
hierarchy, command, control, privilege, and the unequal distribution of 
power, so typical of the ‘class struggle’ of this world (Marx 1848), is writ 
large on this card. 
Another reason that is it not hard to ‘read’ the ideology of tarot is 
because, at the beginning of the twentieth century, the ‘secrets’ of eso
teric elitism were fully exposed to the mass consciousness (Decker and 
Dummett 2002) and subsequently penetrated into, and become a part of, 
the ideological fabric of this planet. Members of the men’s huts of the 
time, most notably Crowley and other members the fraternal organiza
tion he founded, made it a point to expose the ‘secret teachings’ to the 
outside world. A scandal at the time, Crowley irked members of Her
metic Order of Golden Dawn when he self-consciously set himself, and 
other members of his very own secret club, as the revealers of all the 
secrets. Crowley created the journal The Equinox, and then subsequently 
published Golden Dawn secrets and rituals in his open esoteric journal.12 
He sets the agenda in the opening editorial of the publication, though not 
12.  All issues of the journal are available online at http://hermetic.com/crowley/
 equinox/ (retrieved April 3, 2013).
376 © Canadian Journal of SoCiology/CahierS CanadienS de SoCiologie 39(3) 2014
 without first casting standard aspersions on the ‘multitudes’ (i.e., lower 
classes) of the world.13 
With the publication of this Review begins a completely new adventure in 
the history of mankind. Whatever knowledge may previously have been 
imputed to men, it has always been fenced in with conditions and restric
tions. The time has come to speak plainly, and so far as may be in the 
language of the multitude. . . 
But the Brothers of the A ∴ A ∴ make no mystery; They [sic] give you not 
only the Text, but the Comment; not only the Comment, but the Diction
ary, the Grammar, and the Alphabet. (Crowley 1909, 1)
 And so the ‘revelation’ begins. However, it is not a revelation of high 
spiritual truths, but an exposure of elite ideology and elite government. 
The essay that follows Crowley’s editorial [by Councillor Von Eckarts
hausen (1909)] is a veritable map of ‘spiritually enlightened’ government 
over the masses. The document exposes elite justifications for discipline 
and control, justifications given in both standard ‘Christian’ terms (i.e., 
only a few people are chosen, only a few may access the light) and newly 
minted scientific coinage (with references to evolution, strength, and fit
ness.) It is also interesting for the open way it discusses inner circles and 
secret governments, occult group meetings, strategies for co-opting new 
members into the hierarchies of the world, and even political action. Of 
course, we should be cautious about descending too far into the paranoid 
hyperbole of conspiracy. But even so, the nature, scope, and political 
and ideological activities of the elite are well understood by sociologists 
(see, for example, Millar and Dinan 2007). The new revelation here is 
an esoteric mechanism for delivering elite ideology, a mechanism that, 
if our lack of understanding of it is any indication, has been surprisingly 
efficacious. 
A third reason that ‘reading’ the ideology in the cards is not that hard 
is that the ideology itself has spread out into established scholarly work 
about tarot. Scholars themselves, unwittingly or deliberately picked up 
the ideology ‘revealed’ by Crowley as he stepped us all into the new 
13. Let the secrets out? Why? Not to foment the collapse of class structure, but 
because the ideology had become refined enough to be exposed to the mass 
mind. With publication of A.E. Waite’s tarot deck in 1909, the Masonic ideol
ogy of the tarot has moved into the popular mass conscious, where it exerts 
ideological influence over the masses, just like any other religion or spiritual
ity. Almost all modern tarot decks derived from Waite’s extremely popular 
deck (Farley, 2009). Indeed, it is hard to find a deck that does not have char
acteristic cards of the Waite deck, and therefore, Masonic influences.
a SoCiology of tarot                                  
 377
 ‘aeon.’ And they do it in the same obfuscatory way, claiming ancient 
perennial spiritual wisdom underlies the sacred images of the tarot (e.g., 
Place 2005). Jungian psychologists pick up where occult patriarchs left 
off, attributing all sorts of magical, archetypal, and semiotic wisdom to 
the deck. Nichols (1980), a student of the C. G. Jung Institute in Zurich 
repeats many of the clichés of the esoteric brothers (though embellishing 
them with psychobabble to make them look different), and importing 
deep undercurrents of elite ideology and justification.
 Reading the ideology from the cards is not that difficult. No doubt 
there are undercurrents that require deeper analysis, but in many cases 
the representation of elite authority is plain to see. There is an Emperor 
and an Empress, a Pope (Hierophant in later versions), an Angel issu
ing a statement of judgement, and so on. The better question for us is, 
“Why do so few people actually see it?” Why does popular commen
tary on the tarot accept elite justification, ideology, and fanciful legend, 
rather than taking a more critical stance? The answer to that question 
is more complicated. A thin spiritual patina complicates the commen
tary and the imagery, and obscures the ideological content. This spiritual 
patina works to deflect attention. In addition, our eyes are blinded to 
the plain truth by a rhetorical wall spread by the brothers. Those who 
seek to understand tarot are inevitably greeted with the anti-intellectual, 
anti-historical, superficially authoritative, rhetorical bulwark created by 
Freemasons, Rosicrucians, and Golden Dawn mages. One might doubt 
the initial magical, mystical, spiritual important of the deck as repre
sented by members of these men’s huts, but then encounter a Jungian 
psychological’s modern rationale and explanation that obscures ideology 
in a new way. 
There are other challenges. Writings on esoteric topics are often filled 
with obtuse, complicated language filled with “tortuous.... correspond
ences” (Dummett 1980, 130), arbitrary associations, and grammatical 
complexity horrid enough to invoke comment and condemnation, some 
of it tongue-in-cheek,14 from scholars. Pompous verbiage is a rhetorical 
strategy, a verbal sleight-of-hand trick, designed to make a text appear 
authoritative. It fools the naïve outsider in the same way that Dorothy 
was initially fooled by the Wizard of Oz. It also makes actual investiga
tion difficult. How can one question the authority of a sacred text if one 
cannot decipher the verbiage? Crowley’s ponderous exposition of the 
secrets of Enochian magic (Crowley 1912b; 1912c) are illustrative, but 
not the only one. The type of discussion presented in the work of the 
14.  See for example my definition of Egotistical, Polly-syllabic, Multi-metaphor
ic, Obfuscation (EPMO) http://www.thespiritwiki.com/index.php/EPMO.
378 © Canadian Journal of SoCiology/CahierS CanadienS de SoCiologie 39(3) 2014
 ‘brothers’ may be found the work of spiritually inclined (but ideologic
ally näive) psychologists as well (see, for example, Wilber 1996; 2000).
 diSCuSSion
 The intent of this paper is not to expose in detail the underlying ideology 
of the tarot major arcana, that is the task of a subsequent paper entitled 
The Ideology of Tarot (Sosteric, in progress), but rather to demonstrate 
that such work is both needed and possible. In other words, this article 
has tried to establish the need for a sociology of the Western tarot spe
cifically, and a sociology of the occult more generally. This Sociology 
of Tarot includes a sociology of how those who practiced tarot used 
the decks in ways that related to changing relations of class, discipline, 
power, and ideology. It appears that tarot was invented as a deck of play
ing cards, reflecting the life and times of significant Italian families, but 
became implicated in the double revolutions that collapsed structures 
of feudal authority, and legitimated new systems of social authority and 
discipline. The tarot deck was a useful tool for this purpose because the 
imagery was already linked to elite practice (having been invented in the 
courts of Italy), already had suitable iconography (kings, queens, and 
popes), was plastic and could be ‘imprinted’ with additional symbolism, 
and eventually became used as an initiatory device in secret societies 
and new religious sects emerging at this time. Work to establish the oc
cult authority of the deck was accomplished by prominent Freemasons, 
clerics, and members of the transitioning elite. The net result was a deck 
of superb ideological brilliance and utility, capable not only of indoc
trinating members of secret organizations, but also of imprinting mass 
consciousness with elite ideology.
 Although one might initially feel that a sociology of the tarot would 
only be of historical interest, that is not the case. The movement of tarot 
ideology into the mass consciousness, as encouraged by Crowley and 
his brothers for example, has left an unchallenged (and potentially quite 
significant) ideological imprint. Coupled with the recent proliferation of 
superstition, ignorance, and irrationalities of modern society as noted by 
Bauer (2011), and the uncritical way tarot aficionados (even academic 
ones) take up the ideology (e.g. Place 2005), the social impact of tarot 
in contemporary society may be taken too lightly. Doering-Manteufell 
(2011) found a dramatic spread of superstitions that uses modern com
munication technologies as a means to proliferate occult (read ideologic
al) practice. This is particularly evidenced in the proliferation of tarot 
decks. Today literally hundreds of tarot decks are in print, all representing 
a SoCiology of tarot                                  
 379
 the author’s particular views, but almost all of them echoing iconic Ma
sonic imagery and interpretation (Farley 2009). More than ever, socio
logical analysis in the occult tarot specifically, or occult phenomenon 
more generally, seems warranted.
 Sociological investigation would include analysis of ideology and 
control that might explore links between the tarot and the ideological im
portance of religion (Weber 2003), or disciplinary control strategies iden
tified by Foucault (1975) and others. There are also dialogic questions 
about the rhetorical strategies used not only to obscure the true nature of 
elite ideology embedded in the tarot system, but also to lend occult and 
spiritual authority to the tarot (Fairclough 2001). These strategies have 
only been touched on in this paper, but other strategies are evident and 
need to be exposed.15 Finally, the psychology of the tarot, specifically its 
use in dramatic ritual and initiation pageantry, and its utility as a device 
of indoctrination, are also interesting questions worthy of sociological 
examination.
 It is also useful to note that the history of tarot and the occult are not 
just class histories, they are histories of patriarchy and racism. As noted 
earlier, sexism is imprinted on the very structure of men’s huts, and for 
all the mystical wisdom offered up, the sexism is prominent and often of
fensive, especially in dominant figures like Aleister Crowley [see for ex
ample the opening words of the Crowley editorial in the inaugural edition 
of Equinox (Crowley 1912)]. Racism also figures in the principal texts 
of theosophical movement [see Blavatsky 1888; Besant 1907 and 1911), 
and Besant & Leadbeater (1913)] where doctrines of spiritual progress, 
reincarnation, and karma are based on racial frameworks and derogatory 
characterizations of “non-Aryan” racial groups (Staudenmaier 2009, 52). 
Even contemporary Masons exclude women from consecrations of their 
lodges. In this context, it is important to point out that in the Masonic 
tarot, the Fool (the tarot ‘signature’ card representing the subject of the 
initiatory/evolutionary journey) is inevitably white, male, and young.
 Berger (1969) assumed that Western societies would experience 
decline of spiritual and religious belief, and increased secularization. 
15. For example, some authors will simply state truths as obvious, self-evident, 
and needing no authority, investigation, or elaboration. This questionable 
(and one would think academically transparent) rhetorical device is used, for 
example, by Place (2005, 75) who makes bald faced rhetorical claims about 
contested ideological frameworks without even attempting to back his state
ments up. For example, referencing the mystical vision of Levi, Place echoes 
elite ideology in the form of justifications of gender, and mystical cosmic 
dances between good and evil (Sosteric, unpublished), and asserts the ver
acity of said mystical truths as ‘sophisticated mystical vision’, self-evident, 
and requiring ‘no authority to verify its timeless truth.’
380 © Canadian Journal of SoCiology/CahierS CanadienS de SoCiologie 39(3) 2014
 Berger himself has retracted the thesis, admitting that the secularization 
project has failed miserably, but rather than giving religion, spirituality, 
and the occult another look, Berger echoes earlier dismissals by rejecting 
spiritual and religious belief as “dripping with reactionary supernatural
ism,” and draws a boundary around its discussion (except as object of 
scholarly derision), excluding it as “beyond the pale at self-respecting 
faculty parties” (Berger 1999, 4). This is unfortunate. When talk of the 
sociology of occult means that you could risk the respect of your col
leagues, scholars are likely to accept the canonical status quo and find 
other research interests. 
This paper defends the need for a new sociology of tarot, occult, and 
ideology, and an open discussion of the significance and relevance of 
occult knowledge and practices. Note, however, that it is more than just 
social class, gender, ethnic, or ideological interest that is at stake here. 
There is a sociological question raised by all this: “Why do spiritual
ity, religion, and the occult continue to hold such traction?” The implicit 
and probably unspoken (except at closed faculty parties) assumption of 
those who follow Berger probably invokes stupidity, incredulity, and ir
rationality, but this is hardly an explanation at all. People are not stupid 
and they do not, in general, believe things for no reason (Sosteric, Under 
Review). Better causes need to be established. Elites seem to believe 
in the tarot because it has been constructed by their members to reflect 
(and help distribute) an ideology supportive of hierarchy, privilege, and 
control. 
Still others, like psychologists, have been critical of spiritual be
liefs since Freud’s (2012) dismissal of religion as an infantile delusion, 
yet some adopt the tarot as a fountain of mystical/archetypal wisdom 
in pretty much the same way as established by occult elites. There is 
also a very long history of very smart people being interested in religion, 
spirituality, and mystical phenomenon (Verselius  2007). William James, 
father of American psychology, took religion and mystical experience 
seriously not as an example of something else (e.g. as a class opiate, 
or as providing social solidarity, or as a sacred canopy, or as a stepping 
stone from our superstitious past into our rational future), but as some
thing worthy of direct and engaged investigation (James 1982). Are these 
people stupid, irrational, and reactionary as well? Or, moving out of the 
realm of scholarly inquiry, why does the tarot remain so popular, or why 
do occult beliefs in general enjoy ongoing popularity. Can it all be dis
missed as naivety or elite ideology, or is there something else going on 
with tarot and religion not yet identified by sociologists?
 Hints may be offered here. In my sociology of religion class, for ex
ample, I explore the opportunistic nature of religion and spiritual beliefs. 
a SoCiology of tarot                                  
 381
 It turns out that when one examines the history of religion from a trans
disciplinary perspective (Lundskow 2008), religious and spiritual beliefs 
are, as I argue in the course, opportunistic. That is, it is not just tarot that 
becomes a virtual Rorschach suitable for ideological impregnation by 
whatever ‘special interest’ group happens to come along; rather, spiritu
ality and religion in general represent themselves as suitable for the pro
jection of a political, economic, and other special interests. Religion and 
spirituality come to express — always and wherever they are found — 
the social order, environmental realities, and even economic exigencies 
of a particular society at a particular time. Note however, that elites do 
not have unilateral control over the consciousness of the masses. Because 
religion is a resource, spirituality is a (arguably poorly) contested realm. 
It is the case that progressive or reactionary economic, political, and even 
gender interests may be inscribed into religious texts. 
There is some work in this area. Owen (2004) has identified the 
spiritualism of late Victorian England as a practice and belief system out
side the dominant patriarchy of the time, and other more contemporary 
examples may be found, as for example the grass roots, feminist compat
ible spirituality of Starhawk (Rigiglioso 2005). Religion and spirituality 
as resource may help explain why it remains a continual thorn in the 
side of the pundits of secularization. Nevertheless, despite the possibil
ity of progressive spirituality, the question still remains, “Why do the 
masses accept these systems so uncritically?” or “Why do reactionary 
belief systems retain traction?” The persistence of the tarot may, as we 
have seen, be linked not only to elite machination, infantile fantasy, or 
opiate derived delusion, but also to basic human needs, needs that are not 
f
 illed by the empty secularity of an ‘enlightened’ world (Sosteric 2013). 
In other words, there is a real psychological thing (a rational thing, an 
emotional, thing, even a human thing) going on here, and this thing must 
be taken at face value to be legitimate. Psychologists of the humanistic 
school have taken the thing seriously in acknowledging needs and mo
tivations beyond food, water, and shelter, at least since Maslow, who 
formalized a ‘positive theory of motivation,’ recognized the ‘need’ for 
self-actualization and transcendence (Maslow 1943). Others also take it 
seriously as well, suggesting, for example, that people enter into esoteric 
‘cultic’ communities (tarot being one, generic new age belief systems 
being another) for rational reasons; for example, because they are dis
satisfied with solutions offered by religion and science (Jorgensen 1982; 
Laqueur 1996). In this context individuals may gravitate towards and ac
cept tarot as the “bible of bibles” Freemasons make it out to be, because 
they are attempting to satisfy deep needs for spirituality and meaning 
382 © Canadian Journal of SoCiology/CahierS CanadienS de SoCiologie 39(3) 2014
 (Sosteric 2013), needs not met, or met inadequately, through other av
enues of spiritual or religious experience. 
Finally, a third reason for continued belief in the occult, spiritual, 
mystical, esoteric, mystery traditions may be because they represent 
real experiences, real revelation, and real gnosis that undermine normal 
taken-for-granted reality of our regular 3D world (Lynch 1977; Sosteric 
Under Review). This suggestion may strike readers as scientific heresy, 
as indeed it is. But the alternative is to dismiss the collective experiences 
of billions of people throughout history who have believed in mystical 
realms beyond the mundane, but also the individual experiences of schol
ars who have had some powerful mystical experiences (e.g. Castaneda 
1985). I find myself in this group of scholars whose interests were per
haps not initially scholarly, but mystical, and whose mystical experiences 
“broke open the head” (Pinchbeck 2003) and led them to question the 
materialist foundation of science. Such experiences are of deep scholarly 
interest (Forman 1999), and fit very well into the gnostic experiences 
reported by Western mystics down the ages (Versluis 2002). 
Just as many other scholars use experience to develop scholarly 
insight, my experiences with tarot, mysticism, and gnostic traditions, 
have lead me to new sociological understandings. This raises scholarly 
questions, none of which can be served by out-of-hand, anti-scholarly 
dismissal. Western mystery schools, occult traditions, even established 
exoteric institutions like the Roman Catholic Church, all justify their 
positions, their tools, their bibles, their tarot books, by ascribing them to 
real mystical, magical, experiences. Christian are told to believe in the 
bible because it is the word of God, expressed through the mystical rev
elation of the prophets. Buddhists follow Buddhists tracts because they 
represent the mystical revelation of Buddha. Freemasons and Protestant 
clerics offer the tarot as the “bible of bibles” and support its authority in 
the same way, with claims for its antiquity, and linkages to the mystical 
experiences of authoritative personages (e.g. Hermes Trismegistus, the 
Egyptian god Thoth, etc.). This is nothing new. James (1982) said that all 
religions derive from somebody’s mystical experiences. The point in this 
paper is simply that gnostic traditions, the words of the mystics, occult 
‘wisdom’ traditions, ‘mystical tools’ like the tarot, deserve serious and 
critical inquiry and analysis as such, and there is good reason to apply 
sociological analysis here. People who have mystical experiences often 
impress upon them their social class, gender, ethnic, political, and eco
nomic biases. Nowhere do we find ‘pure’ gnostic truth. Everywhere we 
f
 ind opportunistic imprints on spiritual ‘revelation.’ The problem is, if we 
dismiss spirituality and religion as nothing more than ideology, as salve 
against existential crises, or as infantile fantasy, not only do we miss an 
a SoCiology of tarot                                  
 383
 arguably valid area of inquiry (spirituality and gnosis), we also leave a 
spiritual vacuum, an absence of sociologically sophisticated understand
ing, that has profound global consequences. As Butler (2006) notes, 
the Christian Right has been able to gain ascendency in global politics 
and culture precisely because the Left has abdicated responsibility for 
providing such meaning. We sociologists have seen the Wizard of Oz, 
recognized him as a charlatan, and walked away. We have posted signs 
on the wall saying caveat emptor, but nobody seems to be reading the 
signs. Why do people continue to genuflect before the Wizard? There is 
a powerful need operating, and somebody always seems willing to fill it. 
The problem is that the people who move in, often do so without the best 
intentions (they have political, economic, gender and racial agendas), 
or without a sufficient degree of sociological, psychological, physical, 
chemical, even historical sophistication. The result is active imposition 
of ideology in the first case, or naïve adoption and unwitting propagation 
of ideology in the second. I would suggest a grass roots, sociologically 
sophisticated, spirituality, needs to be offered.
 Alternatives already exist. Mentioned above is Owen’s (2004) work, 
but critical, grassroots, spiritual turn already exists, as for example in 
the ‘goddess movement’ (Rigoglioso 2005, 173). Starhawk is an author 
actively involved in constructing the Goddess movement as a working
class, grass-roots, politically sophisticated, active response to injustice, 
inequality, etc. It combines feminist theology and is interesting for the 
contested terrain that it represents in the attempt to distinguish ‘authen
tic’ spiritual paths from ‘fluffy bunny’ paths that are less substantive, 
more commodified and consumerised, and less serious (Coco & Wood
ward 2007). The same could be done for tarot. I myself am developing, 
under a pen name, tarot images and archetypes that a) self-consciously 
break Masonic ideas, b) represent authentic spiritual gnosis (at least, in 
my view) and c) attempt to provide a critical, politically progressive, and 
sociologically sophisticated turn on spiritual/mystical thought in general 
(Sharp 2006), and the tarot more specifically (Sharp 2009; 2013; unpub
lished.). It is a response to the call Butler (2006) has made for a critical, 
substantive, sophisticated, and progressive spirituality, and that Swimme 
(1988) has made for stories that potentially save us from the increas
ingly disparate, and desperate, political, economic, and social state of af
fairs. The lesson of the Goddess movement, and the lesson of the Western 
tarot, is that there is a space to contest spiritual meaning and gnosis and, 
more importantly, there is a space (and a need) for sociologists to get 
involved. Exposing the roots of the tarot or other forms of mysticism in 
elite ideology is only the first step. The next step, for those so inclined, 
is to create new tarots, new gnostic wisdom, or at least to contribute to 
384 © Canadian Journal of SoCiology/CahierS CanadienS de SoCiologie 39(3) 2014
 a respectful, but critical, turn. Head (2012), for example, embraces tarot 
as a way to bring depth to the experience of being queer. He uses tarot 
(admittedly the Masonic version) to embrace pride and justify queerness. 
The point is, the space is there. As sociologists we have but only to move 
in and fill it. 
Filling in the religious, spiritual, and occult spaces will no doubt be a 
challenge, and perhaps one of the biggest challenges will be overcoming 
scholarly prejudice and actually taking the areas of interest seriously. 
There have always been attempts to dismiss the investigation of reli
gion, spirituality, and other boundary phenomenon (Gyimesi 2012; Som
mer 2012). Nevertheless, while skeptics certainly abound, research into 
boundary areas shows remarkable longevity (Kloosterman 2012) with 
notable intellectuals often coming down on the side of belief (Sommer 
2012). No doubt there will be instances of dismissive ridicule (Stauden
maier 2009), even outright censure, but such reactions do not represent 
serious open minded scientific attitudes, but prejudice and fear of the 
kind associated with religion and dogma, and not science and truth. The 
whole thing has resulted in a “paucity of responsible scholarship [and] 
existing research in this area [that] is thin, often neglected, and of inevit
ably uneven quality” (Staudenmaier 2009, 48 - 49). For reasons outlined 
in this paper and more, it is a good time to begin alleviating this lacuna, 
especially now, as there is a growing recognition of the significance of 
the sacred, religious, boundary phenomenon which are no longer easy 
to dismiss as mere epiphenomena, but must be taken as significant, im
portant, and in desperate need of analysis, attention, and understanding 
(Redden 2011).
 aCknoWledgementS 
The author would like to thank Dr. Mike Gismondi and the anonymous 
reviewers for their helpful comments on earlier drafts of this article.
 referenCeS
 Anon. 2012. Private Telephone Conversation with GG, Evangelical Christian.
 Bala, Michael. 2010: The Clown. Jung Journal: Culture & Psyche 4 (1): 50-71.
 Barnard, Chester. 1968. The Functions of the Executive. Cambridge, MA: Har
vard University Press.
 Bauer, Martin W. 2011. Editorial. Public Understanding of Science 20 (3): 290
291.
a SoCiology of tarot                                  
 385
 Beeb, John. 2008. A tarot reading on the possibility of nuclear war. Psychologic
al Perspectives: A Quarterly Journal of Jungian Thought 16 (1): 97-106.
 Berger, Peter L. 1969. The Sacred Canopy. New York: Anchor Books. 
Berger, Peter L. 1999. The Desecularization of the World: Resurgent Religion 
and World Politics. Grand Rapids MI: Eerdmans.
 Besant, Annie. 1907. Study in Consciousness: A Contribution to the Science of 
Psychology. London: Theosophical Publishing House.
 Besant, Annie. 1911. Man and his Bodies. London: Theosophical Publishing 
House.
 Besant, Annie, & Leadbeater, Charles. 1913. Man: Whence, how and whither. 
London: Theosophical Publishing House.
 Blavatsky, Helena. 1888. The Secret Doctrine. London: Theosophical Publishing 
House.
 Butler, Jennifer. 2006. Born Again: The Christian Right globalized. London: 
Pluto Press.
 Case, Paul Foster. 2013. An Introduction to the Study of the Tarot. Gauteng, SA: 
Ancient Wisdom Publications (originally published in 1920).
 Castaneda, Carlos 1985. Teachings of Don Juan: A Yaqui Way of Knowledge. 
Washington: Washington Square Press.
 Cicero, Chic, & Cicero, Sandra. 2012. The Essential Golden Dawn: An Introduc
tion to High Magic. Minnesota: Llewellyn.
 Coco, Angela, & Woodward, Ian. 2007. Discourses of authenticity within a pa
gan community: The emergence of the “fluffy bunny” sanction. Journal 
of Contemporary Ethnography 36 (5): 479-504.
 Collins, H. M. & Pinch, T. J. 1982. Frames of Meaning: The Social Construction 
of Extraordinary Science. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
 Crowley, Aleister. 1909. Editorial. Equinox 1 (1): 1-3. Retrieved April 4, 2013, 
from http://hermetic.com/crowley/equinox/equinox-Ii.pdf
 Crowley, Aleister. 1912a. Editorial. Equinox 1 (8): xxiii-xxvi. Retrieved April 4, 
2013, from http://hermetic.com/crowley/equinox/equinox-Iviii.pdf
 Crowley, Aleister. 1912b. A brief abstract of the symbolic representation of the 
universe derived by Doctor John Dee through the skrying of Sir Edward 
Kelly. Equinox 1 (7): 229-243. Retrieved April 4, 2013, from http://her
metic.com/crowley/equinox/equinox-Ivii.pdf 
Decker, Ronald, & Dummett, Michael. 2002. A History of the Occult Tarot, 
1870-1970. London: Duckworth.
 Decker, R., Depaulis, T., & Dummett, M. 1996. A Wicked Pack of Cards: The 
Origins of the Occult Tarot. New York: St Martin’s Press.
386 © Canadian Journal of SoCiology/CahierS CanadienS de SoCiologie 39(3) 2014
 Devereux, G., ed. 1953. Psychoanalysis and the Occult. New York: International 
Universities Press.
 Dobb, Maurice 1972. Studies in the Development of Capitalism. New York: Tay
lor & Francis.
 Doering-Manteuffel, Sabine. 2011. Survival of occult practices and ideas in mod
ern common sense. Public Understanding of Science 20 (3): 292-302.
 Dummett, Michael. 1980. The Game of Tarot. London: Duckworth.
 Dummett, Michael. 2007. Six XV-century tarot cards. Who painted them? Arti
bus et Historiae. 28 (56): 15-26.
 Durkheim, Emile. 1915. The Elementary Forms of Religious Life: A Study in 
Religious Sociology. London: Allen & Unwin. Retrieved April 4, 2013, 
from http://archive.org/details/elementaryformso00durkrich
 Elias, Norbert. 1994. The Civilizing Process: The History of Manners and State 
Formation and Civilization. Oxford: Blackwell.
 Farley, H. 2009. A Cultural History of Tarot. London: I.B. Tauris
 Fairclough, Norman 2001. Language and Power. Toronto: Pearson Education 
ESL.
 Collins, H. M., & Pinch, T. J. 1982. Frames of Meaning: The Social Construc
tion of Extraordinary Science. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
 Forman, Robert. 1999. Mysticism, Mind, Consciousness. Albany: State Univer
sity of New York Press.
 Foucault, Michael. 1975. Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison. New 
York: Vintage.
 Freud, Sigmund. 2012. The Future of an Illusion. Buffalo: Broadview Press.
 Gad, I. 1994. Tarot and Individuation: Correspondences with Cabala and Al
chemy. York Beach, ME: Nicholas-Hays.
 Gorski, Philip S. 1993. The Protestant ethic revisited: Disciplinary revolution 
and state formation in Holland and Prussia. American Journal of Sociol
ogy 99 (2): 265-316. 
Gyimesi, Julia. 2012. Sandor Ferenczi and the Problem of Telepathy. History of 
the Human Sciences 25 (2): 131-148.
 Hammer, Olav. 2004. Claiming Knowledge: Strategies of Epistemology from 
Theosophy to the New Age. Leiden: Brill. 
Hanegraaff, Wouter, J. 2005. Forbidden knowledge: Anti-esoteric polemics and 
academic research. Aries 5 (2): 225-54.
 Head, Al. 2012. The queer fool. Sexualities 15 (3): 3-10.
 Hess, D. J. 2007. Spirits and Scientists: Ideology, Spiritism, and Brazilian Cul
ture. Pennsylvania: Penn State University Press.
a SoCiology of tarot                                  
 387
 Horn, Eva. 2011. Logics of political secrecy. Theory, Culture & Society 28 (7-8): 
103-122.
 Ivtzan, Itai. 2007. Tarot cards: A literature review and evaluation of psychic ver
sus psychological explanations. Journal of Parapsychology 71 (Spring): 
139-149.
 Jacob, Margaret C. 1981. The Radical Enlightenment. Pantheists, Freemasons 
and Republicans. London: Allen and Unwin.
 Jayanti, Amber. 1988. Living the Tarot: Applying an Ancient Oracle to the Chal
lenges of Modern Life. London: Wordsworth.
 Jewkes, Yvonne. 2005. Men behind bars: “Doing” masculinity as an adaptation 
to imprisonment. Men and Masculinities 8 (1): 44-63.
 Jorgensen, Danny L. 1982. The esoteric community: an ethnographic investi
gation of the cultic milieu. Journal of Contemporary Ethnography 10: 
383-407.
 Jorgensen, Danny L., & Jorgensen, Lin. 1982. Social meanings of the occult. The 
Sociological Quarterly 23 (3): 373-389.
 Kieser, Alfred. 1998. From Freemasons to industrial patriots. Organizing and 
disciplining in 18th century Germany. Organization Studies 19 (1): 47
71.
 Kloosterman, Ingrid. 2012. Psychical research and parapsychology interpreted: 
Suggestions from the international historiography of psychical research 
and parapsychology for investigating its history in the Netherlands. His
tory of the Human Sciences 25 (2): 2-22.
 Knoop, Douglas, and Jones, G. P. 1947. The Genesis of Freemasonry. An Ac
count of the Rise and Development of Freemasonry in its Operative, Ac
cepted and Early Speculative Phases. Manchester: Manchester Univer
sity Press.
 Koselleck, R. 1988. Critique and Crisis: Enlightenment and the Pathogenesis of 
Modern Society. Oxford: Berg. 
Lachman, Gary. 2011. Secret Societies. Retrieved April 3, 2013, from http://
 garylachman.co.uk/2011/10/18/secret-societies/
 Levi, Eliphas. 2002. The Key of the Mysteries. New York: Red Wheel/Weiser.
 Laqueur, Walter. 1996. Fin-de-siècle: Once more with feeling. Journal of Con
temporary History 31 (1): 5-47.
 Lundskow, George. 2008. The Sociology of Religion: A Substantive and Trans
disciplinary Approach. London: Pine Forge Press.
 Maitre, J. & Becker, Chris. 1966. The consumption of astrology in contemporary 
society. Diogenes 14 (53): 82-98.
 Mannheim, Ernst. 1979. Aufklärung und öffentliche Meinung. Studien zur 
Soziologie der Öffentlichkeit in 18. Jarhundert. Hrsg. v. Norbert Schin
dler. Stuttgart-Bad Cannstadt: Frommann-Holzboog. 
388 © Canadian Journal of SoCiology/CahierS CanadienS de SoCiologie 39(3) 2014
 Marx, Karl. 1848. The Communist Manifesto. Retrieved April 4, 2013, from. 
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1848/communist-mani
festo/
 Maslow, Abraham. 1943. A theory of human motivation. Psychological Review 
50: 270-296. Retrieved April 4, 2013 from http://psychclassics.yorku.ca/
 Maslow/motivation.htm
 Mathers, MacGregor. 2008. The tarot. Its occult significance, use in fortune
telling & method of play. Retrieved April 4, 2013 from the website of 
the Esoteric Order of the Golden Dawn: http://www.esotericgoldendawn.
 com/mysteries_tarot_tarotmathers.htm
 McLaughlin, T. 1996. Street Smarts and Critical Theory. Madison: University 
of Wisconsin Press.
 Miller, David, & Dinan, William. 2007. A Century of Spin: How Public Relations 
Became the Cutting Edge of Corporate Power. New York: Pluto Press.
 Nasierowski, Tadeusz, & Britman, Jonathan. 2012. Freemasonry and psychiatry 
in Poland. History of Psychiatry 23 (3): 329-341.
 Nichols, Sallie. 1974. The wisdom of the Fool. Psychological Perspective: A 
Quarterly Journal of Jungian Thought 5 (2): 97-116.
 Nichols, Sallie. 1980. Jung and Tarot: An Archetypal Journey. San Francisco: 
Weiser Books.
 Nicholson, Christina 2003. How to believe six impossible things before break
fast: Irigaray, Alicer, and Neo-pagan negotiation of the otherworld. Fem
inist Theology 11: 362-74.
 Noddings, N. and P. Shore. 1984. Awakening the Inner Eye: Intuition in Educa
tion. New York: Teachers College, Columbia University.
 Ouspensky, P. D. 1976. The Symbolism of the Tarot: Philosophy of Occultism in 
Pictures and Numbers. Mineola, NY: Dover Publications.
 Owen, A. 2004. The Darkened Room: Women, Power and Spiritualism in Late 
Victorian England. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
 Place, Robert M. 2005. The Tarot: History, Symbolism, and Divination. New 
York: Jeremy P. Tarcher.
 Pollack, Rachel. 1980. Seventy-eight Degrees of Wisdom: A Book of Tarot. 
Wellingborough, Northhampton: Aquarian Press.
 Pratesi, Franco. 1989. Tarot in bologna: documents from the university library. 
The Playing-card 17 (4): 136-146. Retrieved April 4, 2013, from http://
 trionfi.com/pratesi-cartomancer
 Redden, Guy. 2011. Religion, cultural studies and New Age sacralization of 
everyday life. European Journal of Cultural Studies 14 (6): 649-663.
 Remy, J. 1990. Patriarchy and fratriarchy as forms of andocracy. In J. Hearn & 
D. Morgan (Eds.), Men, masculinity and social theory. London: Allen & 
Unwin.
a SoCiology of tarot                                  
 389
 Rigoglioso, Marguerite. 2005. Interview with Starhawk. Feminist Theology 13: 
173-183.
 Robbins, T., & Anthony, D. The sociology of contemporary religious move
ments. Annual Review of Sociology 5: 75-89.
 Roberts, John M. 1972. The Mythology of the Secret Societies. New York: Scrib
ner.
 Rosengarten, Arthur. 2000. Tarot and psychology: Spectrums of possibility. St 
Paul, MN: Paragon House. 
Rossi, E. L. 1986. The Psychobiology of Mind-body Healing. New York: Norton.
 Rudin, Marcia R. 1990. Cults and satanism: Threats to teens. NASSP Bulletin 74 
(526): 46-52.
 Santarcangeli, Paolo. 1979. The jester and the madman, heralds of liberty and 
truth. Diogenes 27 (106): 28-40.
 Schindler, Norbert. 1982. Freimaurerkulture in 18. Jahrhundert. Zur sozialen 
funktion des geheimnisses in der entstehenden bürgerlichen gesellschaft. 
In R. M. Berdahl et al. (Eds.). Klassen und culture: Sozialanthropolo
gische perspektiven in der geschichtsschreibung. Frankfurt an Main: 
Syndicat. 
Sech, Alexandre, de Freitas, Saulo, & Moreira-Almeida, Alexander. (2013). Wil
liam James and psychical research: Towards a radical science of mind. 
History of Psychiatry 24 (1): 62-78
 Semetsky, Inna. 2000. Symbolism of the Tower as abjection. Parallax 6 (2): 110
122.
 Semetsky, Inna.  2009. Transforming ourselves/transforming curriculum: Spirit
ual education and tarot symbolism. International Journal of Children’s 
Spirituality 14 (2): 105-120
 Semetsky, Inna. 2010a. Interpreting the signs of the times: Beyond Jung. Social 
Semiotics 20 (2): 103-120.
 Semetsky, Inna. 2010b. When Cathy was a little girl: The healing praxis of tarot 
images. International Journal of Children’s Spirituality 15 (1): 59-72.
 Semetsky, Inna. 2011a. Tarot images and spiritual education: The three I’s mod
el. International Journal of Children’s Spirituality 16 (3): 249–260.
 Semetsky, Inna. 2011b. Re-symbolization of the self: Human development and 
tarot hermeneutic. Rotterdam: Sense Publishers.
 Simmel, Georg. 2006. The sociology of secret societies. American Journal of 
Sociology 11: 441-498.
 Sharp, M. (2006). The Book of Light: The Nature of God, the Structure of Con
sciousness, and the Universe Within You (Vol. One - Air). St. Albert, Al
berta: Lightning Path Press.
390 © Canadian Journal of SoCiology/CahierS CanadienS de SoCiologie 39(3) 2014
 Sharp, M. (2009). The Book of the Triumph of Spirit: Halo/Sharp New Energy 
Archetypes. St. Albert: Lightning Path Press.
 Sharp, M. (2013). The Book of Triumph of Spirit: Healing and Activating with 
the Halo/Sharp System. St. Albert: Lightning Path Press.
 Sharp, M. (unpublished). The Book of the Triumph of Spirit: Master Key. St Al
bert, Alberta: Lightning Path Press.
 Sommer, Andreas. 2012. Psychical research and the origins of American psych
ology: Hugo Munsterberg, William James and Eusapia Palladino. His
tory of the Human Sciences 25 (2): 23-44.
 Sosteric, M. (under review) Doing the Sociology of Religion. 
Sosteric, Mike. 2013. Sociology 231: Sociology of religion. Athabasca, AB: 
Athabasca University.
 Sosteric, Mike. (in progress) The Ideology of Tarot.
 Sosteric, Mike. (in progress(a)). Inscribing a Revolutionary Tarot: The “New 
Energy” Halo/Sharp. 
Spain, D. (1992). Gendered spaces. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina 
Press. 
Spiegelman, Marvin J. 1998. The scientific and mythological basis of divination. 
Psychological Perspectives: A Quarterly Journal of Jungian Thought 37 
(1): 92-107.
 Staudenmaier, Peter. 2009. Occultism, race and politics in German-speaking 
Europe, 1880—1940: A Survey of Historical Literature. European His
tory Quarterly 39: 47-70.
 Steiner, Rudolf. 1957. Occult history. London: Rudolf Steiner Press.
 Stone, Alison. 2006. Adorno and the disenchantment of nature. Philosophy & 
Social Criticism 32 (2): 231-253.
 Swimme, B. (1988). The Cosmic Creation Story. In D. R. Griffin (Ed.), The 
Reenchantment of Science (pp. 47-56). New York: State University of 
New York.
 Truzzi, M. 1974a. Definitions and dimensions of the occult: Towards a socio
logical perspective. In E. A. Tiryakian (Ed.), On the margin of the visible: 
Sociology, the esoteric and the occult (pp. 243-257). New York: John 
Wiley.
 Truzzi, M. 1974b. Towards a sociology of the occult: Notes on modern witch
craft. In I. I. Zaretsky and M. P. Leone (Eds.), Religious movements in 
contemporary America (pp. 628-645). Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univer
sity Press.
 Versluis, Arthur. 2007. Magic and Mysticism: An Introduction to Western Esoter
icism. New York: Rowan and Littlefield.
a SoCiology of tarot                                  
 391
 van Dülmen, Richard. 1986. Die gesellschaft der aufklärer. Zur bürgerlichen 
emanzipation und aufklärerischen kultur in Deutschland. Frankfurt am 
Main: Fischer. 
Von Eckartshausen, Councillor. 1909. An Account of A ∴ A ∴ first written in 
the language of his period. Equinox 1(1). Retrieved April 4, 2013, from 
http://hermetic.com/crowley/equinox/i/i/eqi01003.html Weatherly, Joan. 
1986. Yeats, the tarot, and the Fool. College Literature 13(1): 112-121.
 Weber, Max. 1987. The Sociology of Religion (4th ed.). Boston: Beacon.
 Weber, Max. 2003. The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism. London: 
Dover.
 Wilber, Ken. 1996 The Atman Project: A Transpersonal View of Human De
velopment. Wheaton, IL: Quest Books.
 Wilber, Ken. 2000. Integral Psychology. Boston: Shambhala.
 Wilber, Ken. 2001. Quantum Questions: Mystical Writings of the World’s Great 
Physicists. Boston: Shambhala.
 Wood, Juliette. 1998. The Celtic tarot and the secret tradition: A study in modern 
legend making. Folklore 109: 15-24.
 Woofitt, Robin. 2000. Some properties of the interactional organization of dis
plays of paranormal cognition in psychic-sitter interaction. Sociology 34 
(3): 457-479.
 Yates, Frances A. 1975. The Rosicrucian Enlightenment. London: Paladin.
 Zaretsky, I. I. and Leone, M. P. (eds.). 1974. Religious Movements in Contempor
ary America. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
 Mike Sosteric is Associate Professor of Sociology at Athabasca University. He 
teaches the Sociology of Religion, Sociology of Technology, and Science and 
Mysticism courses. He is the coordinator and author of several successful sociol
ogy courses. He is currently working to establish a Sociology of the Occult and 
a Sociology of Tarot and has created his own critically oriented tarot deck, the 
Halo/Sharp deck.
392 © Canadian Journal of SoCiology/CahierS CanadienS de SoCiologie 39(3) 2014